The Project Gutenberg EBook of Our Navy at war, by Josephus Daniels

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this ebook.

Title: Our Navy at war

Author: Josephus Daniels

Release Date: November 01, 2020 [EBook #63596]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

Produced by: Carlos Col√≥n, The University of North Carolina at Chapel
             Hill and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
             https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
             generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
             Libraries.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK OUR NAVY AT WAR ***




  Transcriber's Notes:

  Italic text is denoted by _underscores_ and bold text by
  =equal signs=.

  Small uppercase have been replaced with regular uppercase.

  Blank pages have been eliminated.

  Variations in spelling and hyphenation have been left as in the
  original.




[Illustration: From painting in Navy Department by R. S. Meryman]




                            OUR NAVY AT WAR


                                  BY


                           JOSEPHUS DANIELS
                         SECRETARY OF THE NAVY
                             1913 to 1921


                            [Illustration]


              Illustrated with Reproductions of Original
                       and Official Photographs


                           Pictorial Bureau
                           Washington, D. C.
                                 1922




                             COPYRIGHT BY
                           PICTORIAL BUREAU
                                 1922




                   _To the Six Hundred Thousand Men_

                 _Who Served in the United States Navy
                        and Marine Corps in the
                              World War_


_Manning more than two thousand vessels--_

_Operating with Allied Navies from the Arctic to the Adriatic--_

_Transporting troops and supplies across the Atlantic--_

_Protecting ships from attack and destruction--_

_Driving off and defeating the murderous submarines, You made safe the
seas, and Kept open the Road to France, so that, Of all the vast Army
sent overseas, Not one soldier on an American troop-ship Lost his life
on the way to France._

_Fighting with the Army, your comrades, The Soldiers of the Sea, won
fame in Hard-fought battles that saved Paris, Drove back the German
hordes, and Won for Humanity Complete and Glorious Victory._


_In recognition of your splendid service, your dauntless deeds, this
work is dedicated by one who was sometime your commander and always
your shipmate._




CONTENTS


  CHAPTER      PAGE

       I. When the War Call Came                        1

      II. "To Be Strong Upon the Seas"                  9

     III. The Break with Germany                       19

      IV. The Day of Decision                          30

       V. Sending Sims to Europe                       36

      VI. Naval Allies in Historic Conference          45

     VII. "We Are Ready Now, Sir"                      53

    VIII. Race Between Wilson and Hindenburg           70

      IX. The Fleet the Kaiser Built for Us            89

       X. Guarding the Coast of France                 99

      XI. Gibraltar and the Convoy                    116

     XII. Shutting up the Hornets in Their Nests      125

    XIII. President Wilson as a Strategist            143

     XIV. Comrades of the Mist                        151

      XV. Cinderellas of the Fleet                    161

     XVI. "Do Not Surrender"--"Never"                 173

    XVII. When the U-Boats Came to America            187

   XVIII. Marines Stopped Drive on Paris              206

     XIX. The Answer to the 75-Mile Gun               218

      XX. The Navy That Flies                         228

     XXI. The Ferry to France                         241

    XXII. Radio Girdled the Globe                     250

   XXIII. A Surprise for Count von Luxburg            259

    XXIV. American Admiral Saved Kolchak              268

     XXV. The Half-Way House                          275

    XXVI. To Victory on a Sea of Oil                  280

   XXVII. Edison--and 100,000 More                    285

  XXVIII. Building a Thousand Ships                   297

    XXIX. Making Sailors out of Landsmen              309

     XXX. Three Hundred Thousand Strong               318

    XXXI. Women in the Navy                           328

   XXXII. Coast Guard Wins Distinction                332

  XXXIII. Winning the First Battle of the War         341

   XXXIV. Fighting the Profiteers                     347

    XXXV. "Sirs, All Is Well with the Fleet"          354

   XXXVI. After the Armistice                         366




ILLUSTRATIONS


  Josephus Daniels                                      _Frontispiece_

                                                           FACING PAGE

  War Chiefs of the Navy, the Secretary and his Advisory
  Council                                                           16

  A Friendly Bout                                                   17

  School Hour Aboard a Battleship                                   17

  President Wilson and the War Cabinet                              32

  American Dreadnoughts, the Embodiment of Sea Power                33

  American Destroyers in Queenstown Harbor                          52

  The Return of the Mayflower                                       53

  The Surrender of the U-58                                         58

  Crew of the Fanning, which sank the U-58                          59

  They, Too, Were Ready                                             67

  The Seattle and Rear Admiral Albert Gleaves                       68

  A Dash through the Danger Zone                                    68

  The Sinking of the President Lincoln                              80

  The Secretary of the Navy with Captain Dismukes and the
  men who saved the Mount Vernon                                    81

  The Mount Vernon safely in port after being torpedoed             81

  Brest, Center of the Great System of Naval Operations in
  France                                                           112

  A German "Sub" and Some of its Enemies                           113

  At Gibraltar, Key to the Mediterranean                           124

  The Great Mine Barrage against the Submarines                    125

  Planting Mines in the North Sea                                  128

  How the Big Mines in the North Sea Barrage Worked                129

  One of the Perils of Mine-Sweeping                               136

  The Mine-Sweepers Proved Wonderful Sea Boats                     136

  United States Naval Officers in Important Commands               137

  American and British Naval Officials                             137

  The Transport which carried President Wilson to the Peace
  Conference                                                       144

  Allied Naval Council in Session at Paris                         145

  Fifth Battle Squadron Joining the British Grand Fleet            160

  Surrender of the German High Seas Fleet                          161

  American Sub-chasers at Corfu, Greece                            168

  A Flock of Sub-chasers with their Mother-ship                    169

  Gun-crew of the Luckenbach has a Four-Hour Fight with a
  Submarine                                                        192

  Chief Gunner's Mate Delaney, of the Campana, Defying his
  Captors                                                          192

  The Merchant Submarine Deutschland                               193

  Leaders of the Marines                                           208

  The Marines in Belleau Wood                                      209

  Naval Railway Battery Firing from Thierville upon Longuyon       224

  On the Turret Platform of a Battleship                           225

  Assembling Naval Airplanes at Brest                              228

  A Navy Blimp Leaving Hangar at Guipavas, France                  229

  Naval Aviation Hangars at Guipavas                               229

  Pauillac, Naval Aviation Station                                 240

  Fliers whose Exploits Brought Prestige to Naval Aviation         241

  The Station Whose Messages are Heard around the World            256

  The Tablet on the Main Building of the Lafayette Radio
  Station                                                          257

  Eagle Boats at Anchor in the Ice of the White Sea                274

  The Half-Way House                                               275

  The Naval Consulting Board and the Navy Department Chiefs        288

  Secretary Daniels and Thomas A. Edison                           289

  Fitting Out for Distant Service                                  304

  Hanging up a Record                                              305

  The Living Flag                                                  320

  United States Naval Academy at Annapolis                         321

  Yeomen (F) in Liberty Loan Parade, New York City                 328

  Cyclops, the Collier which Disappeared without Leaving a
  Trace                                                            329

  Lost with Every Man on Board (Coast Guard Cutter Tampa)          336

  They Saved Survivors of Torpedoed Vessels                        337

  Gallant Officers of the Coast Guard                              337

  A General View of Bantry Bay                                     352

  A Close-up View of American "Subs" at Berehaven                  352

  Rodman and Beatty                                                353

  From Manila to the Adriatic                                      368

  Scorpion, only American Naval Vessel Interned during the
  War                                                              369




Our Navy at War




CHAPTER I

WHEN THE WAR CALL CAME

  NEWS FLASHED TO SHIPS AND STATIONS FIVE MINUTES AFTER PRESIDENT
  SIGNED DECLARATION--ENTIRE NAVY MOBILIZED AT ONCE--FLEET, ON WAR
  BASIS SINCE BREAK WITH GERMANY, WAS AT YORKTOWN--"IN BEST STATE OF
  PREPAREDNESS IT HAD EVER BEEN," ADMIRAL MAYO SAID--OFFICERS AND MEN
  EAGER FOR ACTION.


Five minutes after President Wilson signed the war resolution passed by
Congress April 6, 1917, the Navy's radio operators were flashing this
message to every ship and station:

  Sixteen Alnav. The President has signed act of Congress which
  declares a state of war exists between the United States and
  Germany. Acknowledge. 131106.

                                                       SECNAV.

That dispatch had been prepared hours before. Radio and telegraph
operators were at their keys waiting for the word to "let it go."
Lieutenant Commander Byron McCandless, my naval aide, was waiting in
the executive office at the White House. Lieutenant Commander Royal
Ingersoll was stationed at the Navy Department, across the street,
watching for the signal. The moment the President appended his
signature, McCandless rushed out and wigwagged that the resolution had
been signed. Ingersoll dashed down the corridor to the Communication
office, and ordered the operators to start the "alnav" (all navy)
dispatch.

Flashed from the towers at Arlington, in a few minutes it was received
by the Atlantic and Pacific fleets, by vessels and stations all along
the coast. By radio, telegraph and cable, the message was carried to
Panama, across the Pacific to Honolulu, the Philippines, to the vessels
on the Asiatic station. By the time the newspaper "extras" were on the
street, the naval forces had received notice that we were at war.

The fleet was mobilized that afternoon by the following telegram to the
five flagships:

  _U. S. S. Pennsylvania_
  _U. S. S. Minnesota_
  _U. S. S. Seattle_
  _U. S. S. Columbia_
  _U. S. S. Vestal_

  Flag Sigcode. Mobilize for war in accordance Department's
  confidential mobilization plan of March 21. Particular attention
  invited paragraphs six and eight. Acknowledge.

                                             JOSEPHUS DANIELS.

  [Paragraph 6 assigned the rendezvous of the various forces, and
  paragraph 8 contained instructions with regard to vessels fitting
  out at navy yards.]

When this message was received by the Atlantic Fleet, at 1:33 p. m.,
Admiral Henry T. Mayo, Commander-in-Chief, hoisted on his flagship, the
_Pennsylvania_, the signal, "War has commenced." At 5:50 o'clock he
received the mobilization order, for which officers and vessels were so
well prepared that Admiral Mayo said he did not have to "give a single
order of any kind or description to pass the Fleet from a peace to a
war basis." The entire Navy--Department, Fleet, yards and stations--was
on a war footing within a few hours after war was declared. Complete
instructions and plans, brought up to date, had been issued two weeks
previous, and mobilization was completed without an hour's delay.

The Fleet was at its secret rendezvous "Base 2," to which it had sailed
from Hampton Roads on April 3, the day after President Wilson delivered
his war message to Congress. "Base 2" was Yorktown, Va., one of the
most historic spots in America, and our battleships were in sight of
the place where Cornwallis surrendered to George Washington. They rode
at anchor in the waters where the timely arrival of De Grasse's ships
assured the success of the war for American independence.

In those waters, first made historic in naval annals by the presence
of the French ships sent to aid the struggling colonists in the
crucial days of 1781, the American Navy was making ready to repay that
invaluable assistance--to send its vessels to the beleaguered French
coast, both to safeguard the vast army America would send to France and
to drive back the onrushing enemies that threatened its life. In 1917
the York and the Chesapeake were again the rendezvous of fighting men
of the same mettle as those of 1781, who were to strengthen by united
service and common sacrifice in the World War the bonds of friendship
between France and America that had been forged more than a century
before.

And those who fought each other then were comrades now. "Old wars
forgot," Great Britain and France for years had held the lines, and
America was taking its place beside them, throwing all its power and
strength with them against the common foe. From Yorktown went the
first United States forces, ordered overseas just after war began.
Sent to England's aid, to serve with the British forces, their
arrival was hailed as the beginning of a new era in the relations
of the nations--the "Return of the Mayflower." And later went huge
dreadnaughts to the North Sea, joining the Grand Fleet in the mightiest
aggregation of naval power the world has ever seen.

That is a wonderful harbor, there in the York River, with water deep
enough for the largest battleship, and broad enough to accommodate a
whole fleet. With defenses at the entrance to Chesapeake Bay, and nets,
mines and patrol across York River, no submarine could ever hope to
penetrate to this safe haven.

"When the active fleet arrived in Hampton Roads about the 1st of April,
after its training period in Cuban waters, it was in the best state of
preparedness that it had ever been," said Admiral Mayo, "and there was
a feeling of confidence in the personnel of being able to cope with any
emergency."

"At the end of March, 1917, when we were on the verge of entry into
the war," said Rear Admiral Charles P. Plunkett, Director of Gunnery
Exercises, "the gunnery was in the highest state of efficiency that it
has been in the history of the American Navy."

When the break with Germany came the fleet was in Cuban waters, engaged
in target practice, engineering exercises, and battle maneuvers. This
intensive training had been going on under regular schedule for more
than two years. Every man in the fleet, from the Commander-in-Chief to
the youngest recruit, felt in his bones that the maneuvers that spring
were a real preparation for war. Eager to get a chance at the Germans,












































